Hello friends! In this video let us discuss about the
need for binary heap
Let us assume some people are standing in the hospital
in a queue
Now what is the property of a queue? The person
who comes first will be sent to the doctor first
But what if a person comes in a serious
condition? We need to give him some priority. Right?
And he should visit the doctor first
We can call this as a Priority Queue.
that is each item in a queue is given
some priority and further dequeue operation will be done
based on the priority
This is also called as a Priority Queue. We can efficiently
implement a priority queue using binary heap
Now let us learn what is a binary heap
A binary heap is a complete binary tree which satisfies
the heap ordering property. Before discussing with heap
Let us understand the difference between a full tree and
a complete tree
A full binary tree is a tree in which every
node other than the leaves has two children
See here every node has exactly two children other than
the leaves. This is called a full tree
where a complete binary tree is a full tree in
which the last level may contain lesser nodes but it
should be as left as possible
See here the last level is incomplete but the nodes
are as left as possible. So this is called a
complete tree. In the same tree,
If last level nodes are in the right side leaving
the left side vacant, then it is not a complete tree
The last level nodes should be as left as possible
so the binary heap is a complete tree that is
other than the last level
All levels should be filled completely
We have two kinds of heaps - Min-heap and Max-heap
First let's discuss about min heap
In min heap, every parent node value will be lesser
than the children's value
That is the parent node will have the minimum value
See this example
This is a min heap tree
We can take any subtree
It's root will be the minimum value
Take the right subtree 40 is the root and it
is the minimum value in this sub tree
Now take the left sub tree. 20 is the root.
and it is the minimum value and the root of
any min heap tree will be the minimum value
in that tree. Here
10 is the minimum value in this tree and it is the
root of the tree
So in min heap the node with minimum priority will
be present at the root node. So that we can
access the minimum priority node at constant time
Now let us discuss about Max Heap.
In max heap, every parent node's value will be greater than the children's
value
That is the parent node will have the maximum value
See this example. This is a max heap tree
We can take any sub tree
Its root will be the maximum value
Take the right sub tree
70 is the root and it is the maximum value
in this sub tree
Take the left sub tree now. 50 is the root and
it is the maximum value. And the root of
Any max heap tree will be the maximum value in
that tree
Here 100 is maximum value in this tree and it is
the root of the tree
So in max heap the node with maximum priority will be present
at the root node so that we can access the
maximum priority node at constant time
So today we have discussed about the need of a
binary heap and we discussed about priority queue
and we learned that we have two kinds of heaps
Min Heap and Max heap
The low priority node will be present at root and
in max heap, the maximum priority node will be present
at the root
In the next video we will learn how to construct
a heap in detail.